---
layout: post
title:  MRI coil combination
date:   2013-07-21 23:43:08 -0500
categories: [magnetic resonance imaging]
comments: true
description: Derivation of optimal SNR coil combination in MRI 
tags: [research]
---

Since 2000, the equipment of multiple receiver coils become the 
standard for MRI scanners, chiefly due to the invention of 
accelerated data acquisition techniques such as SENSE and GRAPPA. 

In this post, I will summarize one method to combine images from 
different coils when there is no under-sampling.
In this case, the goal is to achieve the best signal-noise-ratio
(SNR) for the combined image.

The noise correlation function is defined as
\begin{align}
\Psi_{ij}(\vec r ) = \left< n_i^* n_j\right>,
\end{align}
where $$n_i(\vec r, t)$$ is the temporal noise for the i'th coil, 
and $$\left<\cdot\right>\equiv \int_0^T \cdot dt / T$$ is the 
temporal average. 
Note $$\Psi$$ is a Hermitian matrix. 

We further assume that
the complex data from different coils are linearly combined, i.e.,

$$
\begin{align}
s =& \sum_i w_i s_i  = f(t) \sum_i w_i c_i\\
n =& \sum_i w_i n_i
\end{align}
$$

Here $$w_i$$ is the weight to be determined, 
$$s_i$$ is the noiseless signal from the $$i$$'th coil, 
$$c_i$$ is the coil sensitivity function of the $$i$$'th coil,
and $$f(t)$$ is the true signal.

The square of SNR is given by the [Rayleigh quotient](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rayleigh_quotient)
\begin{align}
\lambda \equiv \frac{\left<s^* s\right>}{\left<n^* n\right>} 
    = \frac{w^\dagger F w}{w^\dagger \Psi w}
\end{align}
where the coil sensitivities $$c_i$$'s are assumed to be time 
invariant and their correlations are defined from 
\begin{align}
F_{ij} = c_i^* c_j.
\end{align}

Without loss of generality, we assume that $$\left<|f|^2\right>=1$$ 
and $$w^\dagger\Psi w\neq0$$. 
Note both $$\Psi$$ and $$F$$ are non-negative Hermitian matrices.

To maximize SNR, we take $${\partial \lambda}/{\partial w_i^*} = 0$$,
which simplifies to 
\begin{align}
Fw = \lambda \Psi w
\end{align}

If $$\Psi$$ is invertible, the optimal weights $$w$$ form the eigenvector of
$$\Psi^{-1}F$$, i.e.,
\begin{align}
\Psi^{-1}F w = \lambda w.
\end{align}
As a result, the maximal SNR is simply the square root of the maximum 
eigenvalue of this secular equation, i.e., $$\sqrt{\lambda_{\max}}$$.

Note both $$\Psi$$ and $$F$$ have the structure of $$v^\dagger v$$. 
Thus they are both projection operators. As a result,
$$\Psi^{-1}F$$ has only one degree of freedom, 
and there is only one nonzero eigenvalue, given by 
$$\lambda_{\max}=c^\dagger \Psi^{-1}c$$. 

In practice, it is difficult to obtain $$\Psi$$ and $$c_i$$. 
For example, one can scan empty space for some time to deduce
the noise term $$\Psi$$ and scan uniform objects to get the 
coil sensitivity term $$c_i$$. 
A simplifying 
assumption is that $$\Psi=I$$ and $$c_i=s_i$$. 
In other words, all coils are independent with each other and share
the same amount of noise. 
In this case
\begin{align}
\lambda_{\max}=\sum_i|s_i|^2
\end{align}
and $$w=s^*$$.



