---
layout: post
title: The heart of the Buddha's teaching by Thick Nhat Hanh
date:   2015-11-27 13:43:08 -0500
categories: [readings]
comments: true
description: Quotes from the book
tags: [Buddhism]
---

## The Four Noble Truths

### Entering the heart of the Buddha

* For forty-five years, the Buddha said, over and over again, 'I teach only suffering and the transformation of suffering.'

* The Buddha called suffering a Holy Truth, because our suffering has the capacity of showing us the path to liberation.

### The first dharma talk

* The Buddha said, 'Dear friends, I have seen deeply that nothing can be by itself alone, that everything has to inter-be with everything else. I have seen that all beings are endowed with the nature of awakening.' 

* Three points characterize this sutra. The first is the teaching of the Middle Way. The Buddha wanted his five friends to be free from the idea that austerity is the only correct practice. He had learned first hand that if you destroy your health, you have no energy left to realize the path. The other extreme to be avoided, he said, is indulgence in sense pleasure -- being  possessed by sexual desire, running after fame, eating immoderately, sleeping too much, or chasing after possessions.

* The second point is the teaching of the Four Noble Truths.

* The third point is engagement in the world.

### The four noble truths

* The First Noble Truth is suffering (dukkha). The root meaning of the Chinese character for suffering is 'bitter'.

* The Second Noble Truth is the origin, roots, nature, creation, or arising (samudaya) of suffering.

* The Third Noble Truth is the cessation (nirodha) of creating suffering by refraining from doing the things that make us suffer.

* The Fourth Noble Truth is the path (marga) that leads to refraining from doing the things that cause us to suffer. 

### Understanding the Buddha's teaching

* When we hear a Dharma talk or study a sutra, our only job is to remain open. Usually when we hear or read something new, we just compare it to our own ideas. If it is the same, we accept it and say that it is correct. If it is not, we say it is incorrect. In either case, we learn nothing.

* Source Buddhism includes all the teachings the Buddha gave during his lifetime. 

* The Pali canon contains the recension that originated with the Tamrashatiya school, and the Chinese and Tibetan canons contain recensions from a number of other schools, Sarvastivada being the most prominent.The Sarvastivada and the Tamrashatiya recensions were written down at about the same time. The former was written down in Pali and the latter in Sanskrit. 

* By comparing the equivalent sutras in the Pali and Chinese canons, we can see which teaching must have preceded Buddhism's dividing into schools.

* These three streams complement one anohter. It was impossible for Source Buddhism to remember everything the Buddha had taught, so it was necessary for Schools' Buddhism and Mahayana Buddhism to renew teachings that had been forgotten or overlooked.  

* The Buddha said many times, 'My teaching is like a finger pointing to the moon. Do not mistake the finger for the moon.'

* 'For forty-five years, I have not uttered a single word.' He did not want his disciples to be caught by words or notions, even his own.

### Is everything suffering?

* Impermanence and nonself are 'universal.' They are a 'mark' of all things. Suffering is not.

* In several sutras the Buddha taught that nirvana, the joy of completely extinguishing our ideas and concepts, rather than suffering, is one of the Three Dharma Seals.

* Another common misunderstanding of the Buddha's teaching is that all of our suffering is caused by craving.

### Stopping, calming, resting, healing

* Buddhist meditation has two aspects -- shamatha and vipashyana. We tend to stress the importance of vipashyana ('looking deeply') because it can bring us insight and liberate us from suffering and afflictions. But the practice of shamatha ('stopping') is fundamental. If we cannot stop, we cannot have insight.

* There is a story in Zen circles about a man and a horse. The horse is galloping quickly, and it appears that the man on the horse is going somewhere important. Another man, standing alongside the road, shouts, 'Where are you going?' and the first man replies, 'I don't know! Ask the horse!' This is also our story. The horse is our habit energy pulling us along, and we are powerless.

* The first function of meditation - shamatha - is to stop.

* The second function of shamatha is calming.

* After calming, the third function of shamatha is resting. 

* Calming allows us to rest, and resting is a precondition for healing.

* The Buddha said, 'My Dharma is the practice of nonpractice.'

### Touching our suffering

* To understand the Four Noble Truths, not just intellectually but experientially, we have to practice the twelve turnings of the wheel.

* The first turning is called 'Recognition.'

* The Buddha said that to suffer and not know that we are suffering is more painful than the burden endured by a mule carrying an unimaginably heavy load.

* The wounds in our heart become the object of our meditation. 

* The second turning of the wheel is called 'Encouragement.'

* The third turning of the wheel is called 'Realization' and can be expressed as, 'This suffering has been understood.'

* The Buddha said, 'When something has come to be, we have to acknowledge its presence and look deeply into its nature. When we look deeply, we will discover the kinds of nutriments that have helped it come to be and that continue to feed it.'

* The first nutriment is edible food.

* The Buddha said, 'Yet many people eat the flesh of their parents, their children, and their grandchildren and do not know it.'

* The second kind of nutriment is sense impressions. Our six sense organs - eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind - are in constant contact (sparsha) with sense objects, and these contacts become food for our consciousness.

* If after reading the newspaper, hearing the news, or being in a conversation, we feel anxious or worn out, we know we have been in contact with toxins. 

* The Buddha offered this drastic image: 'There is a cow with such a terrible skin disease that her skin is almost no longer there. When you bring her close to an ancient wall or old tree, all the living creatures in the bark of the tree come out, cling to the cow's body, and suck. When we bring her into the water, the same thing happens. Even when she is just exposed to the air, tiny insects come and suck.' Then the Buddha said, 'This is our situation, too.'

*  Use your Buddha eyes to look at each nutriment you are about to ingest. If you see that it is toxic, refuse to look at it, listen to it, taste it, or touch. Ingest only what you are certain is safe.

* The third kind of nutriment is volition, intention, or will - the desire in us to obtain whatever it is that we want. Volition is the ground of all our actions.

* We need the insight that position, revenge, wealth, fame, or possessions are, more often than not, obstacles to our happiness.

* After the farmer went off in that direction, the Buddha turned to his Sangha and said, 'Dear fiends, do you know you are the happiest people on Earth? You have no cows or sesame plants to lose.'

* The Buddha advised us to look deeply into the nature of our volition to see whether it is pushing us in the direction of liberation, peace, and compassion or in the direction of suffering and unhappiness. We need to be able to see the kinds of intention-food that we are consuming.

* The food of consciousness is the fourth of the four kinds of food.

* The Buddha offered another dramatic image to illustrate this: 'A dangerous murderer was captured and brought before the king, and the king sentenced him to death by stabbing. 'Take him to the courtyard and plunge three hundred sharp knives through him.' At noon a guard reported, 'Majesty, he is still alive,' and the king declared, 'Stab him three hundred more times!' In the evening, the guard again told the king, 'Majesty, he is not yet dead.' So the king gave the third order: 'Plunge the three hundred sharpest knives in the kingdom through him.'' Then the Buddha said, 'This is how we usually deal with our consciousness.'

* Shariputra, one of the Buddha's great disciples, said, 'When something takes place, if we look at it deeply in the heart of reality, seeing its source and the food that nourishes it, we are already on the path of liberation.'

* Some people think that to end suffering, you have to stop everything - body, feelings, perceptions, mental formations and consciousness - but that is not correct. 

* Confucius said, 'At thirty, I was able to stand on my own fee. At forty, I had no more doubts. At fifty, I knew the mandate of Earth and Sky. At sixty, I could do what I wanted without going against the path.'

### Realizing well-being

* The cessation of suffering - well-being - is available if you know how to enjoy the precious jewels you already have.

* Don't run away from things that are unpleasant in order to embrace things that are pleasant. 

* Many people are awakened during a difficult period in their lives, when they see that living irresponsibly has been the cause of their suffering, and that by transforming their lifestyle they can bring an end to their suffering. 

* 'Understanding things as they are' (yatha bhuta jnana) emerges from our life and our practice.

* Interbeing is an important characteristic of all the Buddha's teachings. When you touch one, you touch all.

* The Buddha said, 'The moment you know how your suffering came to be, you are already on the path of release from it.'

## The Noble Eightfold Path

### The noble eightfold path

* When you have the opportunity to ask a teacher about the Dharma, 
ask a question that can change your life. 

* Ar ya ashtangika marga ('a noble path of eight limbs') suggests the interbeing nature of these eight elements of the path. 

### Right View

* The Buddha said that Right View is to have faith and confidence that there are people who have been able to transform their suffering. Venerable Shariputra added that Right View is knowing which of the four kinds of nutriments that we have ingested have brought about what has come to be.

* Shariputra described Right View as the ability to distinguish wholesome roots (kushala mula) from unwholesome roots (akushala mula).

* The seed of Buddhahood, the capacity to wake up and understand things as they are, is also present in each of us.

* At the base of our views are our perceptions (samjna). 

* The Buddha advised us not to be fooled by what we perceive. He told Subhuti, 'Where there is perception, there is deception.' The Buddha also taught on many occasions that most of our perceptions are erroneous, and that most of our suffering comes from wrong perceptions.

* We believe that the object of our perception is outside of the subject, but that is not correct. 

* Perception means the coming into existence of the perceiver and the perceived. 

* It is impossible to have a subject without an object. It is impossible to remove one and retain the other. 

* We have an idea of happiness. We believe that only certain conditions will make us happy. But it is often our very idea of happiness that prevents us from being happy. We have to look deeply into our perceptions in order to become free of them. Then, what has been a perception becomes an insight, a realization of the path. This is neither perception nor non-perception. It is a clear vision, seeing things as they are. 

* Master Tai Xu said, 'As long as the tree is behind you, you can see only its shadow. If you want to touch the reality, you have to turn around.'

* Relatively speaking, there are right views and there are wrong views. But if we look more deeply, we see that all views are wrong views. No view can ever be the truth.

### Right Thinking

* Thinking has two parts - initial thought (vitarka) and developing thought (vichara).

* In the first stage of meditative concentration (dhyana), both kinds of thinking are present. In the second stage, neither is there.

* There are four practices related to Right Thinking: 
    * 'Are You Sure?'
    * 'What Am I Doing?'
    * 'Hello, Habit Energy.'
    * Bodhichitta.

### Right Mindfulness

* According to Buddhist psychology (abhidharma, 'super Dharma'), the trait 'attention' (manaskara) is 'universal', which means we are always giving our attention to something. 

* The First Miracle of Mindfulness is to be present and able to touch deeply the blue sky, the flower, and the smile of our child.

* The Second Miracle of Mindfulness is to make the other - the sky, the flower, our child - present, also.

* The Third Miracle of Mindfulness is to nourish the object of your attention.

* The Fourth Miracle of Mindfulness is to relieve the other's suffering.

* The Fifth Miracle of Mindfulness is looking deeply (vipashyana), which is also the second aspect of meditation.

* The Sixth Miracle of Mindfulness is understanding.

* The Seventh Miracle of Mindfulness is transformation.

* In the Discourse on the Four Establishments of Mindfulness (Satipatthana Sutta), the Buddha offers four objects for our mindfulness practice: our body, our feeling, our mind, and the objects of our mind.

* The first establishment is 'mindfulness of the body in the body.'

* We begin by noting all of our body's positions and movements.

* The second way the Buddha taught us to practice mindfulness of the body in the body is to recognize all of our body's parts, from the top of our head to the soles of our feet. 

* The third method the Buddha offered for practicing mindfulness of the body in the body is to see the elements that it is made of: earth, water, fire, and air.

* The second establishment is mindfulness of the feelings in the feelings.

* The practice of not clinging to or rejecting feelings is an important part of meditation.

* The third establishment is mindfulness of the mind (chitta) in the mind. 

* 'Formations' (samskara) is a technical term in Buddhism. Anything that is 'formed,' anything that is made of something else, is a formation.

* The basic unwholesome mental formations are greed, hatred, ignorance, pride, doubt, and views. 

* The fourth establishment is mindfulness of phenomena (dharmas) in phenomena. 'Phenomena' means 'the objects of our mind'.

* When observing dharmas, five kinds of meditation can help us calm our minds:
    * counting the breath
    * observing interdependent arising
    * observing impurity
    * observing with love and compassion
    * observing the different realms

* The conditioned realm belongs to the historical dimension. It is the wave. The unconditioned realm belongs to the ultimate dimension. It is the water.

### Right Speech

* 





