---
layout: post
title: Yoga and long life by Yogi Gupta
date:   2015-10-31 03:43:08 -0500
categories: [readings]
comments: true
tags: [yoga]
---
*Disclaimer: I have been a weekly practitioner at Yogi Gupta Ashram
since May 2015.*

This book is chiefly a handbook on Hatha Yoga postures and breathing techniques. Furthermore, it includes many short articles about Yoga. 
In this post, I would like to summarize some thoughts after reading them.

> The philosophy of Yoga starts with the concept that any idea which is not confirmed by experience must remain mere speculation.

The Sansrit word 'Yoga' means 'union'. But union of what?
In my understanding, it is the union of opposite concepts: 
big/small, cold/hot, up/down, heavy/light, etc.
A very practical pair of opposites is self/non-self.
Enlightenment, or self-realization, or nirvana, is likely to be
referring to the elimination of the self/non-self boundary.

[S.N. Goenka](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/S._N._Goenka) used to say 
that there are three levels of understanding: the hearsay level, 
the logic level, and the experience level.
He uses the analogies for them
of hearing a restaurant is good, seeing other
people enjoying the food there, and trying oneself.

Although we hear the concept of selflessness all the time, 
and it may even make sense intellectually, the lack of "non-self"
experience may be the ultimate hurdle for consistent behavior.
Yoga potentially provides a path for such experience.
To be specific, Hatha Yoga provides a path via obtaining 
health and strength.

> A man is never old, if his spine is flexible.

The Hatha Yoga postures (asanas) exercise the body and its effects 
consist of

* improving circulation
* massaging the glands
* increasing the flexibility of the spine

My personal experience is that unconscious muscle tensions get
released after persistent practices. 
For example, the muscles between the ribs and near collar bones 
may relax after back bends and spinal twists. 
As a result, lung capacity increases.

> When one has succeeded in perceiving the mental reactions by themselves one knows everything, since every material object that may be perceived is only perceived in a similar manner.

Yogi Gupta also talked about meditation in this book.
He gave a brief guideline of firstly practicing concentration and 
then meditation. 
To me, it seems similar to the Buddhist approach of 
first stopping ([samatha](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Samatha)) and then look deeply ([vipassana](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vipassanā)).
In my rough understanding, meditation is an exercise where one tries
to bypass the contact between sensory organ and sense object and 
form perception directly. For example, instead of looking at a 
candle flame, imagining a candle flame.
Then the formation of perception becomes the object of study.

Yogi Gupta emphasized the importance of a teacher, 
and no exercise of meditation was given in the book.
One should seek guidance from a teacher for meditation practices,
as well as advanced Yoga posture and breathing practices.
