---
layout: post
title: RMSD and RMSF
date:   2017-04-07 13:00:00 -0500
categories: [free energy perturbation]
comments: true
tags: [RMSD, RMSF, optimization]
---

[RMSD (root mean square deviation)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Root-mean-square_deviation)
and [RMSF (root mean square fluctuation)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Root-mean-square_deviation_of_atomic_positions)
are common measures of biomolecules' spatial variations in a molecular dynamics (MD) simulation.
RMSD describes the molecule's overall discrepancy with respect to a reference conformation.
RMSF, on the other hand, is a per atom quantity describing the atom's variation
over the whole trajectory.
Their definitions are

$$\begin{align}
\text{RMSD}(t) \equiv& \sqrt{\frac{1}{N_a}\sum_i \|\mathbf r_i(t) - \mathbf r_i'\|^2} \\
\text{RMSF}_i\equiv&\sqrt{\left<\|\mathbf r_i(t) - \left< \mathbf r_i\right> \|^2 \right>}
\end{align}$$

where $$N_a$$ is the number of atoms of interest,
$$\mathbf r_i$$ is the location of the $$i$$'th atom,
$$\mathbf r_i'$$ is its reference location,
$$tr$$ is trace operation, $$\otimes$$ is the outer product,
and $$\left<\cdot\right>$$ denotes temporal average.
In the case of discrete time dynamics, e.g., MD simulation,

$$\left<f(t)\right>\equiv \frac{1}{N_t}\sum_k f(t_k) $$

where $$N_t$$ is the number of time points.

Often times one is interested in the conformational changes after aligning a
group of atoms.
For example, the side chain's RMSD and RMSF with the protein backbone aligned.

Such alignment is naturally formulated as a minimization problem

$$ \min f(R, \mathbf t) \equiv \sum_{i=1}^{N_a} w_i\|(R\mathbf r_i + \mathbf t) - \mathbf r_i'\|^2 $$

where $$w_i$$ is a weighting factor (for example, mass or charge),
$$R$$ and $$\mathbf t$$ are the rotation matrix and translation vector to be determined.
The solution to the unweighted version is commonly known as [Kabsch algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kabsch_algorithm).

To get $$R$$ and $$\mathbf t$$, we solve the two stationary conditions

$$\begin{align} \frac{\partial{f}}{\partial\mathbf t} =& 0 \\
\frac{\partial{f}}{\partial R} =& 0 \end{align}$$

The following vector equality  will be handy

$$\nabla_A tr AB = B^T $$

The first condition gives rise to

$$\mathbf t = \frac{\sum_i w_i \mathbf r_i'}{\sum_i w_i} - R\frac{\sum_i w_i \mathbf r_i}{\sum_i w_i}\equiv \overline{\mathbf r}' - R\overline{\mathbf r}$$

Plugging into $$f(R, \mathbf t)$$, we get

$$ f(R) = \sum_i w_i \|R(\mathbf r_i - \overline{\mathbf r}) - (\mathbf r_i' -\overline{\mathbf r}')\|^2\equiv \sum_i w_i \|R\mathbf p_i  - \mathbf q_i \|^2$$

Here we define new sets of vectors $$\mathbf p_i$$ and $$\mathbf q_i$$ to simplify the notation.
The two groups of atoms have their geometric centers (defined with respect to
the weights $$w_i$$) removed.

Then $$f(R)$$ can be written as

$$ f(R) = tr WP^TP + tr WQ^TQ - 2tr WQ^TRP$$

where $$P$$ and $$Q$$ are both $$3\times N_a$$ matrices whose columns are the atom positions.
Here $$R^TR=1$$ is used.

Since only the last term depends on $$R$$, the second stationary condition won't
give us $$R$$ directly. But we can see that the original minimization problem
is equivalent to the maximization problem of

$$ \max tr R P W Q^T\equiv \max tr R S^T$$

It can be further simplified by applying singular decomposition on the covariance matrix

$$S \equiv QWP^T = U\Sigma V^T$$

We have

$$ \max tr \left(U^T R V\right) \Sigma$$

It's easy to see that the maximum value is attained when

$$R = UV^T$$

Note that this $$R$$ matrix is not guaranteed to be a rotation. It could be an
[improper rotation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Improper_rotation).
Depending on the application, one may or may not want to allow reflection in the
solution.
I will leave it as an exercise to you to restrict the answer to proper rotations.

