---
layout: post
title: Phase kickback
date:   2018-01-25 03:43:08 -0500
categories: [quantum information and computation]
comments: true
---

Phase kickback is a useful concept in quantum algorithm design.
It is more of a way to interpret results than a computational trick,
and it provides a paradigm to interpret many (famous) quantum algorithms,
such as [Shor's algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shor%27s_algorithm), [the phase estimation algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum_phase_estimation_algorithm), [Deutsch algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deutsch%E2%80%93Jozsa_algorithm), [Simon's algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simon%27s_problem), etc (see the reference paper at the end for example).

The paradigm can be demonstrated in a simple two-qubit situation $$\left|0\right>\left|\psi\right>$$,
where the first qubit does not contain meanful information (it is commonly known as the ancilla qubit)
and the second qubit contains some meanful information.
(Here I arbitrarily set the ancilla qubit to be in state 0.
Sometimes it is more beneficial to start with state 1.)
The application of a [Hadamard gate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hadamard_transform) on the ancilla qubit followed by a 
control-phase (CPhase) gate on the two-qubit system (the ancilla qubit being the control) gives rise to

$$
C_\phi H\otimes I\left|0\right>\left|\psi\right>
=\frac{\left|0\right>+e^{i\phi}\left|1\right>}{\sqrt 2}\left|\psi\right> $$

where $$I$$ is the identity matrix, $$\otimes$$ is the [tensor product operation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tensor_product),
and the quantum gates are given by

$$H = \frac{1}{\sqrt 2}\begin{bmatrix}
1& 1 \\
1& -1
\end{bmatrix} \quad
C_\phi = \begin{bmatrix}
1& 0 & 0 & 0\\
0& 1 & 0 & 0\\
0& 0 & 1 & 0\\
0& 0 & 0 & e^{i\phi}
\end{bmatrix}$$

Note that it is as if the action of the quantum gates is to add a phase factor to the control (ancilla) qubit.
This is opposite to the common sense that the control bit remains intact and the controlled bit changes.
And this is why this interpretation is called phase kickback.

So far the phase kickback may appear to be somewhat trivial, somewhat strange, and not particularly useful.
Note that most problems are not equally difficult compared to their inverse problems.
For example, multiplying two prime numbers is easy whereas
[factoring a number to its prime factors](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prime_factor) is hard (in fact it is 
[NP-intermediate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NP-intermediate)).
Now suppose we are given the output state, how can we find out what $$C_\phi$$ is, i.e.,
what $$\phi$$ is?

This is actually not too hard given some basic familiarity with quantum mechanics.
Suppose we have an ensemble of this output state, we can keep measuring the three physical observables,

$$
\left<\sigma_x\right> = \cos\phi, \quad
\left<\sigma_y\right> = \sin\phi, \quad
\left<\sigma_z\right> = 0
$$

where $$\sigma_i$$'s are the [Pauli matrices](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pauli_matrices).
This is basically the [Bloch sphere representation of quantum two-level systems](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bloch_sphere).
Thus in principle $$\phi$$ can be determined as accurate as one wishes.
However, it is not efficient to estimate $$\phi$$ this way due to the cost of generating a large ensemble.

It turns out that many quantum algorithms boil down to somehow encode the answer in the phase of the ancilla qubits,
with the application of a series of controlled gates.
Furthermore, there are efficient ways to measure $$\psi$$, for example, using [quantum Fourier transform](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum_Fourier_transform) (I will write a separate blog post for it).
Thus it is very helpful to think in this phase kickback way:
it is basically a paradigm of how to construct quantum algorithms (not the only paradigm though).

Finally, we can see how Deutch algorithm works, just for fun.
If it's your first time to see it, it may blow your mind somewhat (actually all the famous quantum algorithms are quite crazy at first glimpse).
The complete version of Deutch algorithm solves the following problem: given a binary function $$f$$ defined on binary strings of $$n$$ digits,

$$
f:\{0, 1\}^n \rightarrow \{0, 1\},
$$

suppose we are guaranteed that $$f$$ is either constant or balanced (meaning that half of the answer is 0),
determine whether it is constant or balanced.

On a classical computer, we will have to evaluate $$2^{n-1}+1$$ inputs in order to get the answer.
In contrast, Deutch algorithm needs only one measurement on $$n$$ qubits: an exponential speedup!
For simplicity, I will only consider the $$n=1$$ case.
Generalizing to the $$n$$-qubit case is somewhat straightforward.
Again, in this simple case, classically we need to evaluate two inputs.
With a quantum computer, we only need one readout on one qubit.

The first thing we need to worry about is how to implement $$f$$.
Obviously it cannot be applied on quantum states directly since its domain is binary strings.
In Deutch algorithm (and many other algorithms), it is implemented as a unitary evolution.
More specifically, its action is defined by

$$ \left|x\right>\left|y\right> \longrightarrow \left|x\right> \left|f(x)\oplus y\right>$$

where $$\oplus$$ is the XOR operation.
This action is obviously reversible, thus there must be a way to implement it on a quantum computer as a unitary time evolution.
Let's call it $$U_f$$.
Note that its action on $$\left|y\right>$$ is controlled by the value of $$f(x)$$.
It is not a controlled-phase gate but a [control-NOT (CNOT) gate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Controlled_NOT_gate).
Let me also assure you that such $$U_f$$ can be implemented on a quantum computer without exponential trouble.
Thus there is really exponential speed up in this algorithm.

With a hardware implementation of $$U_f$$, we can apply it on a special initial state

$$H\otimes H\left|0\right>\left|1\right>$$

where the first qubit is the ancilla qubit.
After some basic algebra, the ancillar qubit is given by

$$\frac{1}{\sqrt 2}\left(\left|0\right> + (-1)^{f(0) \oplus f(1)}\left|1\right>\right)$$	

Recall that $$f$$ is either constant or balanced.
Thus the phase kickback is either $$0$$ or $$\pi$$,
which is particularly easy to distinguish since they are eigenstates of $$\sigma_x$$.
One can measure $$\sigma_x$$ just once to tell them apart,
and only one copy of the input state is needed.
In the quantum computing framework, the equivalent procedure is to first apply Hardamard gate and then check whether the state is $$\left|0\right>$$ or $$\left|1\right>$$.

Admittedly, Deutch algorithm is quite artificial.
But it opens up the possibility that for some problems, an exponential speedup may be possible on quantum computers.
Many efficient quantum algorithms (more efficient than their classical counterparts) are thus found and a few of them are indeed practically useful.
For more details, you can read the following paper.
It gives a nice introduction to some of the most famous quantum algorithms.

## reference
* [R. Cleve, et al, Quantum algorithms revisited, Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. 454, 339 (1998)](https://arxiv.org/pdf/quant-ph/9708016.pdf)
