---
layout: post
title: Termux on Chromebook
date:   2018-01-15 17:00:00 -0500
categories: [coding]
comments: true
tags: [shell]
---

Last July I bought a Samsung Chromebook Pro for my wife,
as she uses google docs/sheets for work and web browser for entertainment --
exactly what Chromebook provides.
This Chromebook is light-weight (2.4 lbs), thin (0.5"), equipped with touch screen,
has about 7 hours battery time for video streaming, and even has a built-in stylus for writing.
It is a powerful machine (Intel Core m3 processor, 4G RAM, 32G flash storage),
an overkill for just Youtube streaming and web browsing.

(Un)fortunately she was not amused thus the toy is mine.
To set up a coding environment, I found a few options at the time:

* wipe out the ChromeOS and install some Linux distro (welcome to the 90s)
* turn on the so-called developer mode (this action voids the warranty and exposes yourself to the risk of accidentally wiping out the hard drive at boot up by pressing the space key) and then
	* install Ubuntu as dual boot
    * use an app called [Crouton](https://github.com/dnschneid/crouton) to [chroot](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chroot) another Linux distro inside ChromeOS
* keep the ChromeOS and
    * code with text editors like Caret without compiling/running the code
	* code on websites like [Cloud9](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cloud9_IDE)
    * ssh to some remote machine (for example, google cloud provides a [free f1-micro instance with 30G disc and 0.6G RAM](https://cloud.google.com/free/))

I didn't like any of them and reluctantly opted for the ssh option.
It makes the Chromebook useless without fast internet connection.

Fortunately, I discovered an Android app called [Termux](https://termux.com/).
It is a Linux terminal emulator that runs on both Android phones and some Chromebooks (see a full list of them [here](https://www.androidcentral.com/these-are-chromebooks-can-run-android-apps)).
It enables the following tools in a bash environment without internet connection:

* vim
* git
* latex
* python
* go
* gcc/g++
* make
* tmux

They are basically all I need for coding.
It is such a game changer that now I can do real work on this Chromebook.
I even find it more preferable than my MacBook Pro since
it is easier to carry around and has a battery time of over 10 hours for coding.

To instal termux, you can visit this link:

https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.termux

There are a few must-have extensions

* Run `termux-setup-storage`: it creates a folder called `storage` at your home folder
  which provides access to the Chromebook file systems (downloads, music, pictures, etc)
* `pkg install termux-exec`: for better support for bash
* `pkg install diffutils`: for `vimdiff` to work
* `pkg install python-dev`: needed for `LDFLAGS=" -lm -lcompiler_rt" pip install numpy`
* `pkg install pkg-config`: somehow this is needed for `pip install matplotlib`, otherwise it complains that `freetype` is not present (although it is)
* `pkg install libffi-dev`: for Jekyll
* `pkg install libxslt-dev libxml2-dev`: for pandas-datareader

For `matplotlib` to work properly, you also need to create a config file at
`~/.config/matplotlib/matplotlibrc` with the following content:

```
backend : agg
```

You may wonder why I bother installing `matplotlib` in bash.
With `jupyter notebook --ip='0.0.0.0'`, you can see the plots directly in the Chrome browser.

To install scipy, the easiest way is to use the its-pointless repo.
All the community repositories can be seen [from this link](https://wiki.termux.com/wiki/Package_Management#Community_Repositories).

To install latex fonts and templates from various publishers, run
```
tlmgr install collection-publishers
tlmgr install times textcase
```

Termux also supports multiple sessions (like the old Linux tty1, tty2, etc).
The shortcuts are

* `ctrl+alt+c`: create a new session
* `ctrl+alt+n`: go to next session
* `ctrl+alt+p`: go to previous session
* `ctrl+alt+[1-9]`: go to the numbered session

More of these shortcuts can be found in the [termux keyboard page](https://termux.com/hardware-keyboard.html).
I notice that by clicking and holding at the left edge of the screen,
a drawer is activated to view all the sessions.

For more information in setting things up, check out this blog post by Kenneth White:

* [My $169 development Chromebook](https://blog.lessonslearned.org/building-a-more-secure-development-chromebook/)

In case you want to install a real Linux distro on the Chromebook, checkout this post by Miguel Grinberg

* [Using a Chromebook for Web Development](https://blog.miguelgrinberg.com/post/using-a-chromebook-for-web-development)

## issues

The general complaints I have for this Samsung Chromebook Pro are

* The keyboard sucks: the keys are somewhat small and the layout is too crowded.
  Although I gradually get used to the layout, now the left ctrl key gets stuck sometimes due to over use.
  On the other hand the right alt and ctrl keys are almost never used.
* It's too easy to hit the power button accidentally.
* ~~It cannot connect to my company's VPN.~~ (There is an Android app called VpnCilla that does the trick.
  It costs $4.99. Also remember to enable `chrome://flags/#arc-vpn`)
* There is no out-of-box way to display the date in the status bar.
  One has to move the mouse over the clock to see the date.
  I don't know why ChromeOS is like this ...

The complaints I have for termux include

* ~~Pasting into the vim doesn't work although pasting into shell works by long press. My current workaround is to either use `echo <content> >> <file>` or paste into nano.~~ (Paste is `ctrl+alt+v`, works inside vim too, goodbye nano, goodbye long press)
* Access to `http://localhost` is not granted. My current workaround is to host web apps at `0.0.0.0` and access the termux's IP `100.115.92.2` to test out.
* Python multiprocessing module doesn't work. As a result, flake8 doesn't work and I have to use (the inferior) pyflakes instead.

## epilogue

After six months, I gave up Termux and switched to Crouton and Chromebrew.
See my new post [here]({% post_url 2018-07-16-crouton %}).
