---
layout: post
title: Crouton and Chromebrew on Chromebook
date: 2018-07-16 11:00:00 -0500
categories: [coding]
comments: true
tags: [chroot, chromebook, crew]
---

After using Termux for six months (see [my post here]({% post_url 2018-01-15-termux %})),
I switched to [Crouton](https://github.com/dnschneid/crouton) together with
[Chromebrew](https://github.com/skycocker/chromebrew).
My problem with Termux is that when things break after
`pkg upgrade`, it's hard to find solutions sometimes.

On the other hand, Crouton uses [chroot](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chroot)
to install a full-blown Linux OS (almost), making it much easier to maintain.
Take Ubuntu for example, the solution to almost any problem is available online.

Then there is Chromebrew, a package management tool for the native ChromeOS shell.
It is similar to [homebrew](https://brew.sh/) on Mac and its command is `crew`.
So far I haven't experienced any problems with its package upgrade.

After using them for several months, I have a strong inclination to use `crew`
whenever possible.
It has one less layer of indirection, and its graphics support feels more native.
The resolution of Crouton graphics is either too high or too low.
Maybe it's possible to tune it. The only way I know is to toggle the HiDPI option
in the Chrome crouton-integration extension.

I routinely use the installtions of `python`, `go`, `make`, `latex`, `ruby`,
`aws`, `gcloud`, `vim`, `vscode` in Chromebrew, which all work great.
The only problem I ran into is with `npm` and `vue`. So I have them installed
inside the Ubuntu 18.04LTS in Crouton.
It's totally possible that they work in Chromebrew too and I just messed up
some configurations.

As a side note, Google started
[Project Crostini](https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromiumos/docs/+/master/containers_and_vms.md)
to support native Linux apps inside Chrome OS.
It uses container technology and does not even require developer mode.
I may give it a try when my Samsung Chromebook Pro is officially supported.

- [Crostini enabled Chromebook models](https://www.reddit.com/r/Crostini/wiki/getstarted/crostini-enabled-devices).

## Chromebrew

To install Chromebrew, run the following command (copied from their
[Github page](https://github.com/skycocker/chromebrew#installation))

```bash
curl -Ls git.io/vddgY | bash
```

The default installation includes quite many packages, for example,

- `python3`
- `git`
- `make`
- `gcc/g++`
- `ruby`

I also installed a newer `vim` using

```shell
crew install vim
```

For my Samsung Chromebook Pro, `python3` and the new `vim` are not exposed, and
I need to change my `.bashrc` to alias them.
They are all in `/usr/local/bin/`

I also installed `jekyll` and my blog can run locally at `http://127.0.0.1:4000/`
(unlike Termux).

```shell
gem install bundler jekyll
```

Note that some packages need extra configurations to be saved in the
`~/.bashrc` file. These instructions are printed as blue text at the end of the
`crew install <package>` execution.
For example, `sommelier` is a prerequisite for `code` (vscode) and it has
a few configurations to go into the `bashrc` file.
So is the `go` installation.

For some reason vscode didn't work on my Chromebook, and the Chromebrew team
gave me the following trick

```bash
crew remove eudev && crew install eudev
```

One annoying thing is that vscode crashes after closing the Chromebook lid.
To restart, use

```bash
stopsommelier && startsommelier && code
```

## Crouton

### installation

For installation, I followed Miguel Grinberg's post

- [Using a Chromebook for Web Development](https://blog.miguelgrinberg.com/post/using-a-chromebook-for-web-development)

One minor difference is that I installed Ubuntu 18.04LTS instead of the default 16.04LTS.
To see the available Linux releases, use (assuming crouton script is downloaded)

```bash
sh ~/Downloads/crouton -r list
```

The output on my shell is

```bash
chronos@localhost / $ sh ~/Downloads/crouton -r list
Recognized debian releases:
    potato! woody! sarge! etch! lenny! squeeze! wheezy jessie stretch buster sid
Recognized kali releases:
    moto! kali! sana! kali-rolling
Recognized ubuntu releases:
    warty! hoary! breezy! dapper! edgy! feisty! gutsy! hardy! intrepid! jaunty!
    karmic! lucid! maverick! natty! oneiric! precise! quantal! raring! saucy!
    trusty utopic! vivid! wily! xenial yakkety! zesty! artful* bionic*
Releases marked with ! are upstream end-of-life, and should be avoided.
Releases marked with * are unsupported, but may work with some effort.
```

Although Ubuntu 18.04LTS (Bionic Beaver) is listed as unsupported,
it runs fine on my Samsung Chromebook Pro so far.
Overall, my installation command was

```bash
sudo sh ~/Downloads/crouton -r bionic -t xiwi,xfce
```

`xfce` is a light-weight desk manager.
`xiwi` is a must-have to integrate the Linux OS better into the Chrome OS.
To make `xiwi` work, one needs to install [crouton extension to Chrome](https://goo.gl/OVQOEt) as well.
More tips on `xiwi` can be found [here](<https://github.com/dnschneid/crouton/wiki/crouton-in-a-Chromium-OS-window-(xiwi)>).

Without `xiwi`, the X11 rending is done by the `xorg` method
(if you use the installation command above, `xorg` is not installed).
With `xorg` rendering, one can switch between Chrome OS and Linux OS using
`ctrl+alt+<forward/backward (the keys next to escape)>`.
On my Chromebook, everything looks extremely small with the default `xfce4` desktop setting.
It also seems to freeze very briefly every now and then.
Thus I opted out of `xrog`.

With `xiwi`, the Linux OS becomes an app (similar to the Android apps in Chrome OS),
making it much easier to switch OS.
One can even run a Linux GUI inside the Chrome browser tab.
The visual quality is worse than the `xorg` rendering or the native Chromebook look.
To get high resolution rendering, click on the Crouton extension and check HiDPI.
But then everything looks too small again.
The brief freeze also goes away with `xiwi` rendering.

In case you want to get rid of an installed release, run

```bash
sudo delete-chroot <name>
```

### basic usage

If you just need a Linux terminal, run

```bash
sudo enter-chroot
```

If you need a graphic desktop environment, use

```bash
sudo startxfce4 -b
```

Here `-b` means "run in the background" so that there is no unusable tab in the Chrome browser.

To run vscode in a browser tab, use

```bash
sudo startxiwi -T code
```

This vscode also looks worse than the one in Chromebrew. And it seems to crash
after a few days.
I basically don't use the graphic part of Crouton at all nowadays.

For vim users, one annoying thing is that `ctrl+w` is captured by Chrome as closing the tab.
The workaround is to expand the tab in full screen mode.
