---
layout: post
title: Run Linux programs on ChromeBook with Crostini
date:   2019-09-05 13:00:00 -0500
categories: [coding]
comments: true
tags: [chromeOS, development environment]
---

I bought a Samsung ChromeBook Pro about two years ago as my coding laptop.
To set up the development environment, I tried Termux, Crouton, and
Chromebrew (aka `crew`), and finally settled on crew.
You can find more details in the following posts.

- [Termux article]({% post_url 2018-01-15-termux %})
- [Crouton and Chromebrew article]({% post_url 2018-07-16-crouton %})

Overall I am very satisfied with ChromeOS and this Samsung device. One missing
piece, however, is Docker. (I heard it's possible to run Docker inside Crouton
with compromised performance, but I never tried.)
The good news is that Google started a project called [Crostini](https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromiumos/docs/+/master/containers_and_vms.md)
a few years ago to enable Linux container inside ChromeOS.
It can do what Termux, Crouton, and Crew can do. In addition,

- There is no need to switch to developer mode.
- We get easy installation and fast execution of Docker.

The bad news is that not all Chromebooks are supported. For example, my
Samsung ChromeBook Pro is not. However, (to my annoyance), the cheaper variants of this
device, i.e., Samsung Chromebook Plus and Samsung Chromebook Plus V2, are both supported.

In late August, I got a deal for HP Chromebook x360 (14-da0021nr), which has
Crostini support. Compared to the Samsung device, its pros and cons are

- pros
    - Good price: I paid $349, whereas the Samsung Chromebook Pro costed me $520 in 2017.
    - Intel 8th gen i3 processor + 8G memory + 64 GB storage
    - The 14 inch display is wide enough for 160 columns.
    - The keyboard is pleasant to type on and has backlit.
    - The speaker is slightly louder, but still not as loud as I want.
    - Besides two USB-C ports, there is also a USB-A port.
- cons
    - It's quite heavy: 3.7 pounds.
    - The hinge of the screen is loose. As I move the laptop, the screen dangles.

If you are interested in buying a Chromebook to run  Crostini, check out the following
links

- [List of Crostini enabled devices](https://www.reddit.com/r/Crostini/wiki/getstarted/crostini-enabled-devices)
- [Auto Update policy for all Chromebooks](https://support.google.com/chrome/a/answer/6220366):
  Google provides support for each Chromebook for a limited years. After that
  time span, the device won't be able to get ChromeOS upgrade.
- [Chrome Unboxed](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCkHgegL2XiXSlwY5zeCKKyg):
  This is a Youtube channel with Chromebook reviews.

In the rest of the post, I will go over the setup for the development environment.
The main pieces are

- Vim 8.1
- Python 3.7
- Go 1.12
- Docker 19.03.1
- VS Code

## my setup procedure

To enable Crostini, go to Settings, search for `Linux (Beta)` and enable it.
Alternatively, it can be accessed with this address `chrome://settings/?search=linux`.

After that, you will be able to access `Terminal` as an app.
By default, the Linux distribution is Debian 9 stretch,
which you can check with

```
cat /etc/issue
```

To make the installation easier (i.e., avoid compilation),
I add the following line in `/etc/apt/sources.list`

```
deb http://ftp.de.debian.org/debian testing main
```

Then run

```
echo 'APT::Default-Release "stable";' | sudo tee -a /etc/apt/apt.conf.d/00local
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get -t testing install python3
sudo apt-get -t testing install python3-pip
sudo apt-get -t testing install vim
sudo apt-get -t testing install texlive
sudo apt-get -t testing install golang
sudo apt-get -t testing install golang-go.tools
```

It installs Python 3.7, Vim 8.1, Go 1.12, and Latex.
I want Vim 8.1 because it supports embedded terminal (try `vert ter` command).

The last line is to make `godoc --http :8888` to work. This command has been removed from the normal
distribution package. Also `go get golang.org/x/tools/cmd/godoc` probably
won't work. See [this issue](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/23445) for details.

### Docker

To install Docker, I basically followed [the official installation guild for Debian](https://docs.docker.com/install/linux/docker-ce/debian/).
To avoid using root (i.e., `docker ...` instead of `sudo docker ...`), run

```
sudo usermod -aG docker $USER
sudo chmod 666 /var/run/docker.sock
```

Some Docker resources are listed here too

* [docker-curriculum](https://docker-curriculum.com/)
* [docker cheatsheet](https://github.com/eon01/DockerCheatSheet)
* [Intro Guide to Dockerfile Best Practices](https://blog.docker.com/2019/07/intro-guide-to-dockerfile-best-practices/)

### VS Code

Installing VS Code is simple. After downloading the installable for Debian,
move it from `Downloads` to `Linux files` (Alternatively, you can run `wget`
or `curl` inside the `Terminal`). Then run
```
sudo dpkg -i code_1.37.1-1565886362_amd64.deb
```

It will show up as an app.

### Github blog

I also installed `jekyll` to run my blog. However, the default port doesn't work.
I thus use port 8000 as it's automatically exposed.

```
jekyll serve --draft -P 8000
```

Below is a list of the exposed ports

```
// TCP ports to statically forward to the container over SSH.
const uint16_t kStaticForwardPorts[] = {
  3000,  // Rails
  4200,  // Angular
  5000,  // Flask
  8000,  // Django
  8008,  // HTTP alternative port
  8080,  // HTTP alternative port
  8085,  // Cloud SDK
  8888,  // ipython/jupyter
  9005,  // Firebase login
};
```

You can find more details in this post

- ["Well-known" ports are now auto-forwarded to the default penguin container on 70.0.3524.2](https://www.reddit.com/r/Crostini/comments/99s3t9/wellknown_ports_are_now_autoforwarded_to_the/)


## Tips

- Open a new terminal window:
    - While the focus is on the terminal window, press ctrl + shift + n
    - Right click (or alt + left click) the 'terminal' logo in the status bar,
      and choose 'New Window' (It doesn't work every time though)
- Access ChromeOS folders from Crostini terminal:
  Right click the folder and choose `share with Linux`. It then shows up in
  `/mnt/chromeos/`.
- Stay on the stable channel. I am usually on the dev channel, and often
  times the bluetooth, ear phone break. Sometimes the Chrome browser crashes
  every few minutes.
- Do not use USB-A / USB-C converter. I think it destroyed the ports of my
  Samsung Chromebook Pro.


## Wish list

- Multiple tab for Linux terminal
- Embed the Linux app, e.g., VS Code, inside Chrome tab
