---
layout: post
title: Wisdom of the West by Bertrand Russell 
date:   2016-05-26 13:43:08 -0500
last_update:   2016-06-30 11:43:08 -0500
categories: [readings]
comments: true
description: Quotes from the book
tags: [philosophy]
---

* Above all, an attempt has been made, wherever this seemed feasible, to translate philosophic ideas, normally expressed only in words, into diagrams that convey the same information by way of geometrical metaphor.

* Secondly, the current trend towards more and fiercer specialisms is making men forget their intellectual debts to their forbears.

* As one comes into the border regions and beyond, one passes from science into the field of speculation.

* In itself philosophy sets out neither to solve our troubles nor to save our souls. It is, as the Greeks put it, a kind of sightseeing adventure undertaken for its own sake.

* In studying this difficult subject we learn what others at other times have thought about these matters. And so we come to understand them better, for their way of tackling philosophy is an important facet of their way of life. In the end this may show us how to live though knowing little.

* The Orphic doctrine tends towards asceticism and emphasises mental ecstasy. By this it is hoped to achieve a state of 'enthusiasm' or union with the god, and thus to gain mystical knowledge not to be had otherwise. In this refined form, Orphic religion had a profound effect on Greek philosophy. 

* It is worth remembering that the Greek word theory first meant something like 'sight-seeing'.

* In the end it is this twofold aspect of the Greek character which enabled it, once and for all, to transform the world. Nietzsche called these two elements the Apolonian and the Dionysiac.

* But serenity on its own is just as incapable as mysticism, of causing an intellectual revolution. What is needed is a passionate search for truth and beauty.

* The original matter is what Aristotle calls the material cause. Anaximander calls it the Boundless, an infinite fund of material extending in all directions. From it the world arises and into it will in the end return.

* Like Anaximander, he (Anaximenes) holds there is a basic matter, but sees this in the specific substance air. The different forms of matter we find around us arise from air through processes of condensation and rarefaction.

* In philosophy, what is important is not so much the answers that are given, bu rather the questions that are asked.

* The Olympian cult was very much a national affair without a strict religious dogma. Orphicism, on the other hand, possessed sacred texts and held its followers together by the bonds of shared belief.

* Just as there are three kinds of men who come to attend the Olympic games, so there are three kinds of men in society. At the lowest level, there are those who come to buy and sell: next we have those who take part in the contest, and finally we have the spectators who come to see, the theoreticians in the literal sense. These last correspond to the philosophers. The philosophic way of life is the only one which holds out some hope for transcending the fortuities of existence, it provides an escape from the wheel of birth. For, according to the Pythagoreans, the soul is subject to a sequence of transmigrations.

* The Latin word 'calculation' means 'a handling of pebbles'. 

* 'The learning of many things does not teach understanding'. This is 
a view which we shall find again in Hegel, and Heraclitus is the source of it.

* Wisdom, then, consists in grasping the underlying formula which is common to all things.

* The Heraclitean doctrine is opposed to the pragmatic view of the Sophists, which Protagoras later expressed in the statement that 'Man is the measure of all things'.

* The Heraclitean doctrine of flux draws attention to the fact that all things are involved in some kind of motion.

* What cannot be thought cannot be, and therefore what can be can be thought. This is the general trend of the Parmenidean argument.

* In order to strike a compromise between the Eleatic doctrine and the ordinary evidence of the senses, Empedocles adopted all of the items hitherto tried as basic, adding to them a fourth. 

* This theory is really a hypostasis of the two sets of opposites, wet and dry, hot and cold.

* Their (love and strife) only function is to unite and divide, though, as the notion of insubstantial agency had not then been developed, they had to be taken as substances. 

* His cosmology is based on a series of cycles starting the world sphere with strife outside and love within, holding the other elements together. Then strife expels love until the various elements are quite separate and love without. Then the reverse happens until we come to the starting point again. 

* From the physician Alcmaeon of Croton, a follower of the Pythagoreans, he took over the theory that health is proper balance between the opposite components, and disease occurs if any one takes the upper hand. Likewise he adopted the theory of pores, or passages, through which the entire body breathes. It is these pores that enable us to have sense perceptions. In particular, his theory of vision, which held sway for a long time, provides for a meeting of effluences from the object seen and a ray of fire coming forth from the eye.

* A man who took no interest in politics was frowned upon, and was called an 'idiot', which is Greek for 'given over to private interests'.

* The strong individualist streak of the Greeks shows itself in their attitude towards the law. In this they are quite on their own and utterly different from their contemporaries in Asia. There, the authority of a ruler is upheld by laws considered as godgiven, whereas the Greeks recognised that laws are made by and for men. If a law is no longer in conformity with the times it can be changed by common consent. But as long as it has the force of common backing it must obeyed. The classical example of this respect for law is the refusal of Socrates to escape the death sentence of the Athenian court. 

* It is well to remember that the thinkers of Greece were not ivory tower intellectuals of the kind that our modern world has inherited from the scholastic traditions of the middle ages.

* Anaxagoras says that 'the things that are in the world are not divided nor cut off from one another with a hatchet' and that 'in everything there is a portion of everything except Nous, and there are some things in which there is Nous also'.

* The Nous, or intelligence, which is here mentioned, is the active principle which takes the place of Empedocles' love and strife. But it is still considered as a substance, although a very are and subtle one. Nous is different from other substances in that it is pure and unmixed. It is Nous that sets things into motion. Further, the possession of it sets apart the living from the inanimate. 

* Concerning perception, he advanced the ingenious biological principle that sensation depends on contrasts. 

* For he equated god with Nous, the active principle which is the source of all motion. Such a view was bound to attract the unfavourable notice of the government, since it naturally raises doubts as to the value of established ritual performances, and to that extent touches upon the authority of the state. 

* Nothing annoys those who govern more than the suggestion that they might after all be not so wise as they themselves imagined.

* But burning schools, or men for that matter, has always proved singularly unhelpful in stamping out unorthordoxy.

* The irrational number aimed at is the limit of the process. The point of the exercise is that we can reach rational approximations as close as we like to the limit. 

* The other main legacy of Pythagorean mathematics is the theory of ideas, which was adopted and further developed by Socrates.

* Any actual drawing must needs be a more or less faithful copy of the mental image.

* We saw how Pythagoras had developed a principle of harmony from his discovery on tuned strings. From it stem the medical theories which consider health as some sort of balance between opposites. The later Pythagoreans took this one stage further and applied the notion of harmony to the soul. According to this view the soul is an attunement of the body, so that the soul becomes a function of the well ordered condition of the body. 

* Pythagoras, it seems, believed in the transmigration of souls, whereas on this more recent view souls die as surely as bodies.

* In astronomy, the later Pythagoreans developed a very bold hypothesis. According to this, the centre of the world is not the earth, but a central fire. 

* What Zeno was trying to show was that if Eleaticism did not commend itself to common sense, rival theories purporting to overcome this impasse led to even stranger difficulties. Thus, instead of giving a direct defence of Parmenides, he tackled the opposition on its own ground.

* Zeno, on the other hand, tries to show that from a certain assumption one can derive two contradictory conclusions. This means that the set of conclusions is not just in fact untrue, but impossible. Hence, so he argues, the assumption from which the conclusions follow is itself impossible. This kind of argument proceeds without any comparison between the conclusions and the facts. It is in this sense purely dialectic, that is, in the realm of question and answer.

* What it does prove is that the theory of units and infinite divisibility cannot be entertained together, or, in other words, that they are incompatible.

* If space exists it must be contained in something, and this can only be more space, and so on indefinitely. Unwilling to accept this regress, Zeno concludes there is not space. What this really amounts to is a denial of the view that space is an empty container.

* The argument is that if Achilles and the tortoise run a handicap race, Achilles can never overtake his competitor.

* Another paradox, sometimes called the racecourse, brings out the other half of the dialectic attack. The argument is that one could never cross from one side of the racecourse to the other, for this would mean that we must traverse an infinite number of points in a finite time.

* Leucippus, of whom nothing else of note is known, was the father of atomism.

* The theory is a compromise between the one and the many. 

* The clue lies in the fact that there are two Greek words for 'not'. One of them is categorical, as in the statement 'I do not like X'. The other is hypothetical and is used in commands, wishes and the like. It is this hypothetical 'not' which figures in the phrase 'what is not', or 'not being', as used by the Eleatics.

* Beyond its importance for natural science, atomism also gave rise to a new theory of the soul. Like everything else the soul is made up of atoms. These constituents of the soul are more refined than other atoms, and are distributed throughout the body.

* Since the sophists felt that knowledge could not be had, they declared that it was unimportant. What mattered was useful opinion. 

* Where the Sophists were interested in sound practice, Socrates held that this was not enough, that in fact the unexamined life was not worth living.

* It is important to distinguish eristic from dialectic. Those who practise the former are out to win, whereas the dialecticians are trying to discover the truth.

* While in the field of education the sophists thus performed a valuable task, their philosophical outlook was inimical to enquiry. For their was a scepticism of despair, a negative attitude to the problem of knowledge. The sum of this position is the famous saying of Protagoras, that 'Man is the measure of all things, of things that are that they are, and of things that are not that they are not'. Thus each man's opinion is true for him, and disagreements between men cannot be decided on the score of truth.

* The three greatest figures in Greek philosophy were all of them linked with Athens. Socrates and Plato were born Athenians, and Aristotle studied and later taught there.

* Except in his younger days, Socrates was not much given to scientific speculation. His foremost interest was with the Good.

* For he holds that what makes a man sin is lack of knowledge.

* The link between Good and knowledge is a mark of Greek thought throughout. Christian ethics is quite opposite to this. There, the important thing is a pure heart, and that is likely to be found more readily among the ignorant.

* The literal meaning of 'irony', which is a Greek word, is something like that of the English word 'understatement'.

* In the end he understood what the oracle meant: God alone is wise, man's wisdom is paltry, he is wisest among men who sees, like Socrates, that his wisdom is worth nothing.

* Then turning to his friends, he tells them what has happened was not evil. Death should not be feared. Either it is a dreamless sleep, or it is life in another world where he can talk undisturbed with Orpheus, Musaeus, Hesiod and Homer, and there they certainly do not kill a man for asking questions.

* The piece of land was linked with the name of the legendary hero Academus, and the institution was therefore called Academy. 

* The Academy is the ancestor of the universities as they developed from the Middle Ages onward.

* The aim of this course of instruction was to turn the thoughts of men from the shifting changes of the experienced world to the immutable framework lying behind it, from becoming to being, to use the words of Plato.

* The important thing is the Academic aim, which was to to train men's minds to think for themselves in the light of reason. No immediate practical goal was envisaged, in contrast with the Sophists who sought nothing beyond proficiency in practical affairs.

* In studying Plato, it is important to keep in mind the central role of mathematics.

* The lover of beautiful things is dreaming, the lover of beauty itself is awake. 

* The Greek word 'idea' means 'picture' or 'pattern'.

* As we saw, the Greeks thought of the state as a city. This is shown by the Greek word 'policy' which means roughtly 'township', in the sense in which this includes the whole social fabric that goes with a well run town.

* For Plato, the citizens in the ideal state are divided into three classes: the guardians, the soldiers and the common people.

* Justice reigns when everyone minds his own business.

* We may have a monarchy, or an oligarchy, or a democracy, and each of these may function either according to legal principles, or else without them, giving in all six different combinations.

* 

